Overview
What I then realized would be necessary was a validation of this eight-function, eight-archetype model as generally applicable. Although I experimented with it often in clinical situations, seeing the figures in my patient’s dreams as so many personifications of typological part-personalities, which could not only be typed but matched to an archetype within the scheme I had developed, I realized I would need a more generally available arena where the types and archetypes could be readily visualized by others. This came through movies, at least those that could be recognized as personal expressions of an auteur director putting out his or her own complexes for an audience to see. I found that my model worked particularly well as a way to analyze films (by then already a topic of intense cultural scrutiny) and I have recorded the results of this kind of analysis in numerous lectures and in two essays that analyze The Wizard of Oz (revised as Chapter 5 in this volume) and Woody Allen’s Husbands and Wives (reproduced as Chapter 14).
The eight-function model I have developed (see Figure 3.8), as an “addition and extension” to Jung’s analytical psychology (Henderson, 1991), asks that we re-examine some of the earlier findings that our field made about type using a four-function model. For instance, Hillman’s description of “inferior feeling,” cited earlier in this chapter, might better be understood as a description of demonic introverted feeling in an introverted thinking type. My dream about the ‘father’ brandishing a butcher knife chasing his ‘son’ around the dining room table, though it opened me up to the idea of the ‘father’ and puer as referring to the more and less developed types on the axis of my auxiliary and tertiary functions, is actually such a shadowy situation, with an obvious reference to Saturn’s sickle, that it is more likely a depiction of senex vs trickster. (At the time of the dream, I had not developed my introverted feeling enough to notice that the young man my unconscious selected to serve as the ‘son’ was actually a very provocative person, who used his introverted feeling in a manipulative way, thus occasioning the senex response in the unconscious.) I now see my early, somewhat faulty, interpretation of the dream as a ‘creative misreading’—one of those helpful misunderstandings which not infrequently serve to advance our thinking (Bloom, 1985).